Started 5 July 2019
Taken from notes at end of phencc.tex
Notes on trying to understand why tauI x R* runs look different from alpha * R* runs

Questions from 2019 April

For tauI trading off with R* runs ...

(a) Did we decide we should plot tauIP minus alpha effect (tauIPnoalpha plots, attached)? They seem to make more sense that tauIP (also attached), but I need a reminder of how we calculated them and a second opinion.

tauIP has alpha in it, so plotting tauIP versus alpha is a bit weird ....
tauIP_noalpha is the tracking-free version of tauIP 
See runanalysisfxs.R: tauIP_mean/(1-alpha)

Use the tauIP_noalpha plots!

(b) Why the bottleneck at 1 x 1 intersection for alpha x R* models (also attached) and no bottleneck for tauI x R*?

Look at both R* versus tauIP (we don't have for alpha).
Lizzie says: plot ratio.rstar versus ratio.tauI with bFin colored (these *are* plotted)

tauIP should look better than tauI


Hi Megan,

We can discuss this next week, but it helped to have the email (helped me at least) so ... question from last time:

(b) Why the bottleneck at 1 x 1 intersection for alpha x R* models (also attached) and no bottleneck for tauI x R*?

We thought they would look more equivalent if both plotted against tauIP, but we're wrong (see attached):

- tauI trades off with R*: more distributed, no bottleneck

- alpha trades off with R*: tight bottleneck still and sharp region of coexistence on one axis.

What am I missing?

Thanks!
Lizzie 

- Sidenote: alphaRstar ... you see nonstationarity flattens out any Rstar trade-off, tauIP is still allowed to vary because if Rstar is equal enough... 

- In no-tracking case species in quadrants where they should not make it do not get driven to extinction very quickly, while they do in the tracking case. Made plots of BFIN at end of stationary for tauRstar cases to check this! And it seems to be correct! See tauRstar.runs_tauIP.t1.rstarstat.wbfin.pdf

- In the no-tracking case, there is a lot more misfit to the environment (many years where species are far from their peak) so they are less likely to compete strongly  ... in tracking case, both species have tighter fit to the environment (they almost all have alpha>0)... which gives less room for everything else, they are more likely to be strongly competing (interspecific competition stronger with tracking, on average).

Tracking and non-tracking runs should look similar, because one is simply changing location of tau_i relative to tau_p... or so we think!

