Started 18 May 2020

Megan reads up on plasticity for me?
	- Simons 2011 -- this one is really good!
	- Chevin & Lande 2015 -- about cues and plasticity; also I need someone smarter than me to read this (suggested by R3) and adjust/explain our statement of "Similarly, expensive cues, such as complex multivariate ones, are possible given a high pay-off" which R3 doesn't like.
	- Scheiner 2013 -- about cue reliability
	- Bonamour et al. 2019: Intro maybe useful? Again on about cues and plasticity

<<><><><><><><>>
Megan and I discussed this on 10 June 2020
- She read Simons 2011
- Is working through Chevin & Lande 2015: Discussion in Lande paper about indicators ... selection environment is multivariate and so you can see hyper adaptation and maladaptive if viewed on one axis (they also discuss an indicator environment) .... falling off reaction norms is sort of like costs
- She will read the others ...
- We define tracking as 'ecological process' and define as plasticity is helpful
- One thing to mention on line 146-154: you can end up somewhere between tracking and bet-hedging (also, side note, write back to R1 -- we're doing ecological time!)
- Megan disappointed by Chevin and Lande, acknowledge in last paragraph of intro altered covariance structure due to climate change... but they didn't actually do any non-stationarity... wait they do shift the environment and the species evolves to a new cue -- this is where we're looking at (what happens basically before the evolution)! Anyway, they shift so the cue goes from one environmental variable to the other; thus if you were just looking at the old variable you would think the species is maladaptive (2000+ generations)
- Chevin and Lande: This factor entails that all other things being equal, an indirect indicator is favored if the sum of the variances of environmental fluctuations and perception error plus the (scaled) cost of plasticity is lower for the indicator than for the causal variable. 
- Chevin and Lande: They assume polygenic traits with MVN reaction norm, so early or late is equally changing variation... but if it's actually a day of year then we expect non-MVN reaction norm ... that is one side is probably a cliff (go to early, die!) and one side is normal 
- Chevin and Lande: They have environmental variance and covariance; wiggle around r(x) norm from developmental stochasticity and microenvironmental stochasticity
<<><><><><><><>>

	
Refs for 

From Bonamour 2019 "For instance, theory predicts that if cue reliability decreases, plasticity may be selected to decrease [15], or else may drive populations to extinction by increasing the expected load caused by phenotypic mismatch with the optimum in a fluctuating environment [16 – 18]."


14. Scheiner SM. 2013 The genetics of phenotypic plasticity: XII: temporal and spatial heterogeneity. Ecol. Evol. 3, 4596 – 4609. (doi:10.1002/ece3.792)
15. Gavrilets S, Scheiner SM. 1993 The genetics of phenotypic plasticity. V. Evolution of reaction norm shape. J. Evol. Biol. 6, 31 – 48. (doi:10.1046/j.1420- 9101.1993.6010031.x)
16. Reed TE, Waples RS, Schindler DE, Hard JJ, Kinnison MT. 2010 Phenotypic plasticity and population viability: the importance of environmental predictability. Proc. R. Soc. B. 277, 3391 – 3400. (doi:10.1098/rspb.2010.0771)

(R3 -- Ally)

REF: Amano et al. 2014

Links between plant species’ spatial and temporal responses to a warming climate

Jonathan is not aware of other papers showing this link (his project with Will Pearse was supposed to do this)! Heather Kharouba also had set this up as a postdoc project (with Lauren Buckley), but did not do it. She recommended:

Socolar et al. 2017 -- PNAS which shows (California birds) that phenological shifts 'conserve thermal niches'... they also talk about tracking climate ("to track temperature by shifting thermally constrained life-history events (e.g., nesting in birds) to colder times of year (Fig. 1)"). Does not cite Amano.

Singer et al. 2017 news piece on this says, "Demonstrations of this intimacy between range limits and phenology have been mainly restricted to plants and insects." (This paper does not seem to cite studies finding correlations.)

(i) perennial species, as well as those with weaker or lagged phenological responses to temperature, experienced a greater increase in temperature during flowering (i.e. failed to maintain climatic niche via phenological changes); (ii) species that failed to maintain climatic niche via phenological changes showed greater northward range shifts; and (iii) there was a complementary relationship between the levels of climatic niche conservatism via phenological changes and range shifts. 

Also cite (in contrast) Duputie et al. 2015:

We show that phenological plasticity is not always adaptive and mostly affects fitness at the margins of the species’ distribution and climatic niche. Under current climatic conditions, phenological plasticity constrains the northern range limit of oak and beech and the southern range limit of pine.

REF: Visser & Both 2005

Here, we assume that the shift in the phenology of a species’ food abundance is, by a first approximation, an appropriate yardstick.


...

The observed changes in phenology cannot be interpreted without considering the ecological context in which a species lives, and especially how other com- ponents of the ecosystem are affected by climate change. What is needed is some sort of a yardstick: a measure of how much a species should shift to match the change in its environment caused by climate change.

** What is needed is identification of the variables that make-up the important selection pressures on the phenology of a species.... in most of this paper we will assume [food abundance is] the main selection pressure on phenology is food abundance (but see §8).**

Section 8: Although we admit that this ‘single critical activity–single selection agent’ scenario is highly unlikely to be the case, we fear that it is the best possible yardstick at this moment. [Lizzie wonders -- a bad yardstick is worse than no yardstick at all?] ... When we go beyond measuring the shifts in phenology of a single selection agent it becomes more difficult to define a yardstick, as we then need to integrate these different selection pressures



REF: Chevin_&_Lande_2015 "We model the evolution of linear reaction norms in response to several correlated environmental variables, in a population undergoing stationary environmental fluctuations"

REF: Ghalambor_etal_2007 ... about adaptive and non-adaptive plasticity, "We conclude that adaptive plasticity that places populations close enough to a new phenotypic optimum for directional selection to act is the only plasticity that predictably enhances fitness and is most likely to facilitate adaptive evolution on ecological time- scales in new environments. However, this type of plasticity is likely to be the product of past selection on variation that may have been initially non-adaptive."

REF: Gienapp et al. 2004: Modeling paper on Great tit (for a special issue), "therefore tentatively conclude that micro- evolution, together with plasticity, would rescue only the population from mild rates of climate change"

REF: Tansey et al. 2017: this one has the table of assumptions you must make to separate plasticity and evolution using spatiotemporal data.

REF: Vedder et al. 2013 -- good contrast to Gienapp, seems to say plasticity is the main thing around and that it can allow Great tit to survive, "Using the effect of changes in early spring temperature on temporal synchrony between birds and a critical food resource, we focus in particular on the contribution of phenotypic plasticity to population persistence. Despite using conservative estimates for evoluti onary and reproductive potential, our results suggest little risk of population extinction under projected local temperature change; however, this conclusion relies heavily on the extent to which phenotypic plasticity tracks the changing environment. Extrapolating the model to a broad range of life histories in birds suggests that the importance of phenotypic plasticity for adjustment to projected rates of temperature change increases with slower life histories, owing to lower evolutionary potential."


(R1 REFS)

REF: Bonebrake_&_Mastrandrea_2011 (reviewer says "species inhabiting highly variable environments should be tracking, which may equip them with an advantage also in a gradually changing world. This idea has been voiced before in models") -- this just says the old adage that the tropics may change more with climate change than the temperate zone.  .... not sure what to do with this.



REF: Pake & Venable 1996: "Long-term data collected from permanent plots over a 10-yr period were used to calculate temporal variation in reproductive success for each species. Species with higher temporal variation in reproductive success had lower germination fractions and smaller seeds, consistent with the theory that seed dormancy and large seed size are partially substitutable bet-hedging strategies"


REF: Simons 2009, "Here, I report a quantitative test using the timing of seed germination—a model diversification bet-hedging trait—in Lobelia inflata under field conditions. In a phenotypic manipulation study, I find the magnitude of fluctuating selection acting on seed germination timing—across 70 intervals throughout five seasons—to be extreme: fitness functions for survival are complex and multimodal within seasons and significantly dissimilar among seasons. I confirm that the observed magnitude of fluctuating selection is sufficient to account for the degree of diversification behaviour characteristic of individuals of this species."


REF: Simons 2011, "Unpredictable natural selection is expected to result in the evolution of bet-hedging strategies, which are adaptations to long-term fluctuating selection.....  The variety and distribution of plausible bet-hedging traits found across 16 phyla in over 100 studies suggest their ubiquity. Thus, bet hedging should be considered a specific mode of response to environmental change." --> Seems a good paper to cite!

However, the evolution of plasticity is limited by available genetic variance in norms of reaction, by physiological, developmental and physical constraints, by the costs of plasticity, and is critically dependent on the availability of cues that reliably predict not only the environments in which the plastic trait will be expressed, but that pre- dict the relationship between fitness and phenotype in these environments. Thus, like adaptive tracking, the evolution of adaptive plasticity is seriously constrained, and constraints are difficult to measure [66].

Because plasticity is adaptive only if response to cues is appropriate, there is no a priori reason to expect norms of reaction to novel environmental change to be adaptive [57,58]. .... indicating that the effective- ness of plasticity under changing environments depends on the temporal stability of the particular mechanism underlying the relationship between phenotype and fitness; here, prey phenology [53]. ... Like any trait, adaptive plasticity requires heritable genetic variance (gen- otype-by-environment interaction) for the evolution of appropriate trait expression—i.e. norms of reaction [65].

...rather than adaptation to specific or predictable environmental changes, bet hedging may be thought of as adaptation to unpredictability or to change itself (Simons 2009)'


When both predictable and unpredictable environ- mental variance influence fitness, a blend of plasticity and bet hedging is expected to evolve [74,75].

Because bet-hedging traits maximize geometric-mean fitness of their carriers across generations but do not maximize the expected fitness within a generation [37], bet-hedging adaptations appear to be detrimental if observed over short periods of time—even under ‘normal’ or average conditions.

<><><><><><><><><>
<> 1 June 2020 <>
<><><><><><><><><>
Chat with Megan about OPT versus plasticity ...

Simple OPT - to go or not (0/1); when things get more complex you end up in plasticity theory ... "your control rules determine your plasticity; they determine what your options are" 

Subsume the OPT into the plasticity language... plasticity theory tells you to track, OPT tells you how to do it. 

plasticity defines the range of possibilities under which an organism can optimize

Plasticity theory says not all traits for all species should be plastic; by extension, not all species should track... 

Phenology and plasticity have a sticky relationship ... 

Plasticity tells us when it would be beneficial in timing to changing environments; when evolution it acts through a cue system which is selected for via OPT. 

Phenology is only plastic when defined in calendar days; but not when defined as thermal sums ... 

Consistent variation in the environment such that cuing can be selected for ... 


* Side note: the only paper (one!) that ISI returns for: TOPIC: ("optimal control" AND plastic* AND trait*) 
is: Resilience, robustness, and plasticity in a terrestrial slug, with particular reference to food quality
